SLIDE 1
The Wharf Folk School & Event Center: Where old world moxie meets contemporary craftsmanship through heritage-forward skill building and community advancement.

SLIDE 3
The 
Wharf
 folk school & event center
At the Port of ranier

SLIDE 4
Port of Ranier Circa 1908 

SLIDE 5
Ranier
Historically vital border town, across the lake from Ontario, CA
On the shores of Rainy Lake, 
boasting one of the nation’s most unique water-based National Parks, Voyageurs, and extending into the Quetico-Superior interlakes boundary waters
Sister towns: Fort Frances, Ontario, CA, and International Falls, MN, of similarly declining populations
  

SLIDE 6
Port of Ranier today, (Loony’s Pub on the right, Cantilever Hotel overflow  lot on the left, leading up to Tara’s 
Wharf Rainy Lake
 Inn and Ice Cream, on the waterfront)

SLIDE 7
Recent Development
New lodging and dining venues have increased options for clientele.
Many shops in Ranier, however, have closed or relocated to International Falls.
The Tara’s Wharf structure remains among the few opportunities in the Port of Ranier for wide scale community development, increased revenue and year round foot traffic to benefit all local businesses.
 
Ad
ditional resources include the land holdings of Co-Founders.  
In the immediate proximity, lots owned by Co-Founder, Phil Paulbeck, situated on Main Street nearby, hold potential to offer a community garden.
The 69 acres owned by Co-Founders John and Marnie Glazier, in Ericsburg, hold additional agricultural and equestrian potential. 
The above, combined with the adjoining parking lot alongside Tara’s Wharf, owned by potential collaborator, Cantilever Hotel and Distillery; and lakeside deck, owned by collaborator Loony’s Pub; hold the key to offering commercial and educational events, like mobile learning labs with local industry and potential partners: Minnesota North Rainy River, Northwest Technical College, and Wells Academy.
Parking in Ranier has been upgraded and continued improvements can be made through collaboration with local property owners.

SLIDE 9
Tara’s 
Wharf
 Inn and Ice Cream Shop
Tara’s Wharf Rainy Lake Inn and Ice Cream, on the waterfront, Rainy Lake

SLIDE 10
Present Opportunity: Tara’s Wharf
What was o
riginally 
John Erickson’s old boat house was purchased and built new in the footprint of the original structure
 in 1987
.
Tara 
opened
 the ice cream shop there in 1996 and has been offering overnight accommodations at the property, since 1997.
Tara’s present goal to retire prompts offers for sale of the property, thus granting the ideal opportunity for the Wharf Folk School and Event Center vision to be realized, and restoration of the Port of Ranier and its 
public
 access docks to begin, thus boosting the economy for the entire region, as in the case of the North House Folk School in Grand Marais, MN. 

SLIDE 11
Note: the first thing Best Western Plus Superior Inn entices potential visitors with is the nearby North House Folk School, regional draw for 29 years.

SLIDE 12
Rainy Lake waterfront and Ranier Town Center, with Tara’s Warf Inn on the left
Closer view of Port of Ranier, 
 with the wharf on the left

SLIDE 13
Port of 
 Ranier, with Loony’s Deck on the right 
Loony’s waterfront Deck 

SLIDE 14
The 
Wharf
 
The Wharf

SLIDE 15
Ice Cream Shop

SLIDE 16
 South side of Ice Cream Shop, abutting  the parking lot
Aerial View (Tara’s Wharf Rainy Lake Inn circled)

SLIDE 17
Executive Summary
Vision: Lakefront indoor, outdoor commercial & educational space bringing prosperity through commerce & skills development, in this historic port of Ranier on Rainy Lake. 
Mission: Vitality Through Tourism & Community Skill-Building  
Indoors: educational/event space, an open lab/classroom for hand crafts, 3D printing, tech, carpentry, and creative projects, an ice cream/coffee shop with simple breakfast/lunch/snack goods, and a gallery/shop on Spruce Street, with local art and craft items, visits from National Park, Recreation, Historical Museum personnel, and trades apprenticeship representatives.   
Outdoors: a garden event/dining area, modest performance area, and neighboring open spaces for collaborative farmers’/craft markets, outdoor concerts, events, industry showcases, and mobile learning labs.  
Focus: on supporting the local economy, to draw visitors, and keep emerging talent in the region.

SLIDE 19
Problem and Solution
Problem: We are in a transitional moment wherein the industry and educational pathways once helping populate the region, are under threat.
Solution: This brings tremendous opportunity for skills development and coalition-building, and for wider exposure of this unique boundary region, intersecting perfectly with the longstanding Nordic model of the folk school as a means of cultivating rural identity, and granting marginalized rural communities access to regionally relevant educational opportunities and skills development – deepening self- and community- reliance.

SLIDE 20
Ranier (Aerial View from Fort Frances, Ontario, CA)

SLIDE 21
Target Market
The local population is small but deeply invested: in the locale itself, and in its heritage, its natural resources, and its people.  The Folk School, Event Center will catalyze intergenerational support of the local economy, and of the area’s future.  It will also provide a key location for continuing to cultivate tourism while preserving the authentic fabric of the Rainy Lake region’s economic, ecological, cultural, and historic heritage.
In the spirit of the early folk schools of 19th Century Denmark, the Wharf will fulfill the community’s need for lifelong learning.  True to Danish nationalist poet and folk school visionary NFS Grundtvig’s ideal for “all people to have access to education according to their own needs and interests,” it will offer vital instruction and training to our 
under supported
 rural populations - young and old alike.   
  

SLIDE 22
Competition
There is no existing entity of this type in the region.  International Falls offers a number of educational and cultural venues, eateries, and commercial enterprises.  Ranier, as well, offers a number of lodging properties, and other business interests.  There is, however, no comprehensive, collaborative  enterprise of this kind in the county.  
Moreover, this endeavor, at its core, is about promoting, supporting, and working with local organizations and individuals, towards regional revitalization.  Thus our unique value proposition is intersectionality and inclusivity:  creative coalition, to provide a much needed boost for our youth and local economy, increasing 
year round
 tourism and community prosperity. 
The closest folk schools in Minnesota include 
Folk School Warroad,
 the 
Ely Folk School, 
and the 
aforementioned
 
North House Folk School 
in Grand Marais.

SLIDE 23
Organizational Management
Founders: Educators: John Glazier & Marnie Glazier, Local Business Owners: Phil Paulbeck & Joy Paulbeck, Technological and Business Consultant: Todd Ojala 
Key Partner/Neighbor Organizations: Loony’s, Cantilever  
Advisors: Tara Nelson(Current Owner/Operator, Tara’s Wharf), Matt Kavan (Owner, Loony’s Pub), 
Jim Hanson (Owner, Atsokan Island), 
Tim Heinle (Former Owner/Operator, Thunderbird Lodge), Tara Houska (Founder, Giniw Collective), Jennifer Lahmayer (Ranier Town Council Member), and Sheri Hutchinson (Minnesota State Educator & Grant Strategist)

SLIDE 24
Product and Service Offerings
Products: 
Coffee, Ice Cream, Simple Breakfast/Lunch/Snack Goods
Locally and Regionally Made Art, Craft Items, Clothing, Merchandise
Event Space
Mixed Media/Art Lounge & Exhibit Space
Services:
Classes
Events
Collaborative Workshops
Apprenticeships